Deepseek finally released their new
flagship model called Deepseek V4. And
this model is forcing us to rethink once
again some things about AI, which is
something that we've seen from Deepseek
time and time again, which is classic
DeepSync at this point. Even when we
look at the Deepseek moment back in
January 2025, the world was shocked
because Deepseek was able to demonstrate
a huge cut in training cost for
reasoning model. And this time,
DeepSseek demonstrated a huge cut in
inference cost, which has been a growing
discussion in the AI industry as demand
for graphics cards continue to
skyrocket. How is Deepseek releasing
their massive 1.6 trillion parameter
model that runs at a fraction of the
cost compared to other Frontier models?
How did Deepseek do this exactly?
Welcome to Kilobbright's Code, where
every second counts. Quick shout out to
BCloud. More name later. For clarity,
anytime Frontier Labs released new
models like V4, it means it's a fresh
model with fresh pre-training run. In
other words, the V3 model that was
released back in December 2024, and all
the versions came after it, like V3.1
and V3.2 are enhancements made to the V3
base version. So, when we look at the
pound-for-pound difference in training
data between V3 and the V4 model, the
training data jumped from 14.8 8
trillion tokens to 32 trillion tokens in
just a year and a half, which goes to
show once again growing compute demand
as training data used to train their
flagship model grew nearly two times in
less than 2 years. Now looking at the V4
model, the common sentiment out there is
China is about to overtake the US. But
open models have always lagged behind
closed models. And while Open Labs
certainly closed the gap in recent
years, this gap will likely going to
continue between models like Deep Seek
V4 and closed models like Claude Myths.
But intelligence isn't the only game in
town when it comes to AI models. While
closed models tend to lead in
intelligence, open models, especially
open models in China, tend to be a lot
more token efficient. In other words,
due to a heavy constraint in compute in
China, models like DeepSync V4 are
demonstrating an incredible token
efficiency that allows them to run their
models at a fraction of the cost
compared to the US models. And even in
comparison to open models like Neotron,
you can see that their focus is heavily
on throughput and speed first and token
efficiency second because compute isn't
as scarce as it is in China where token
efficiency really matters. For
reference, users spend up to $200 a
month for Enthropic's max subscription.
And across all subscription models,
they're all rate limited to a certain
point. Now, in comparison, running the
V4 Pro model from DeepSeek for 24/7 for
an entire month costs about the same
price at $235. Bear in mind that this is
probably a subsidized pricing for the
moment since their base price is much
higher. But the price war between other
AI providers that are trying to serve
this open model at a higher price versus
Deepseek undercutting everyone at lower
pricing is certainly interesting as the
race to the bottom really reflects the
war between inference providers as
compute even among new clouds and
inference providers are limited. Now,
we're certainly not at the point yet
where people would just abandon their
Mac subscription to start using Deepseek
model because the intelligence gap still
matters between open and closed labs
like we saw earlier and Frontier Labs
started to own downstream applications
like Codeex and Cloud Code that act as
wall garden to remain competitive.
Looking at their release note, one thing
that I noticed while I was reading
through Deepseek's paper on V4 model was
just how much DeepSseek is letting their
own technology and breakthrough having a
compounding interest over time. For
example, this is what I personally wrote
down as I read through their paper where
the color blue is their own previous
work that was adapted or incorporated
into the V4 model. And yes, there are a
lot of technical terms being displayed
here. So it goes to show just how much
DeepS is perfecting small portions of
the model architecture and letting that
benefit and compound over time which led
to the V4 model. A great example is the
MHC or manifold constrainted
hyperconnections which allows the model
to be more expressive in the residual
network. Now I won't bore you with
details for this since I covered it in a
previous video that explains how it
works. But as you can see, this kind of
innovation really reflects the spirit of
what open-source industry is all about.
Leveraging breakthroughs and innovations
even from other labs to continue pushing
the technology forward. And all of this
points us towards one thing which is
pricing. How exactly is Deepseek able to
offer their model at such low pricing in
token cost. But first a quick word from
intuitive AI. Economy made by BCloud.
Now we just covered deepseek
technologies which means concepts like
deepseek mixer of experts gpo and
reinforcement learning are all relevant
materials that are hard to grasp.
Intuitive AI covers not only those
topics like deepseec
and other RL techniques as well as
fundamental topics from model
architecture pre-training and
post-training topics. There are advanced
topics to go through like distillation
and Laura where the materials cover step
by step with strong illustrations for
you to follow. BCloud is offering 40%
discount for you guys with a promo code
Caleb. Link in the description below.
When we look at Deepseek's progression,
their previous V3.2 model back in
December 2025 already slashed their cost
by a huge margin compared to the V3.1
model from September 2025. here in just
4 months, you're seeing the inference
cost for both prefill and decode and the
difference in pricing compared between
V3.1 and V3.2. Now, the X-axis here
actually cuts off at 128,000. So, if I
assume that this plot continues to grow
linearly to 1 million context window,
the V3.1 model costs $4.80 per million
input tokens and $16.50 for million
output tokens. And here we have V3.2 two
model that would cost a $1.15 for input
and $1.25 for output in just four months
of time. Now, taking this very model
which is already token efficient and
comparing it against DeepS's new V.4
model only 5 months later, the newer V4
model reduces the KV cache requirement
down to 10% while requiring 27% of the
flop in compute. And the biggest
proponent that allowed this kind of
slashed pricing started with what's
called deepseek sparse attention or DSA.
And the key word here to focus on is
attention. Attention is what makes
Transformers special. But attention is
also what makes Transformers really
expensive to scale. Even back when
ChatPD came out in 2022, the context
window back then only had about 4,000
tokens. And it took us nearly 3 years
until most Frontier Labs now started
offering 1 million context window as a
norm. And this model from Deepseek now
also provides 1 million context window
on their V4 model just like the Neotron
model. And underneath all these models
that all offer 1 million context window,
they all have their own special sauce
that allows this 1 million context
window. Whether it's from having beefy
compute stack, efficiency in model
architecture, or a combination of both.
Neotron, for example, uses the hybrid
Mamba architecture to scale their long
context window spindle to make their
attention more affordable. And in Deep
Seek V4's case, it's DSA. More
specifically, it's an adaptation of the
DSA. DSA uses a lightning indexer which
is aimed directly at solving that very
inefficient scaling of attention by
prioritizing only top K tokens and
throwing out the rest. And this special
indexer is trained separately to rank
tokens based on its importance at a much
lower precision since the job is to
figure out the importance of
relationship between tokens, not the
actual depths of all the tokens. And
using DSA is what allowed the model to
have granular control over the selective
mechanism on how to pick what token is
worth looking at. For example, if you
look at this document, not every word
here has to do with every other word.
And while plain vanilla attention
mechanism might keep all of its
relationships which not only cost a lot
in compute measured in flop but also
memory in VRM for KV cache and being
able to only selectively keep important
relationships within each token is what
DSA allowed the model to do. And it was
this very technique that allowed V3.2 to
have a huge price drop in late 2025. And
taking the DSA even further, DeepSync
leveraged it to incorporate two
additional techniques called CSA and HCA
that took what they already achieved in
V3.2 even further. CSA stands for
compressed sparse attention and HCA
stands for heavily compressed attention.
CSA takes DSA even further by doing some
preliminary work before it hits DSA for
sparse selection. And the idea is
grouping tokens together into a single
compressed entry and then passing it to
the DSA for doing what it does best in
keeping only the relevant context. And
the compression that you're seeing here
is four time compression and then
picking let's say only the top 1,000
selectively. So not only is the model
selecting only relevant tokens and
throwing out the rest using DSA, it's
also doing it on top of a compressed KV
cache. Now, CSA is certainly impressive,
but anytime you're doing compression and
sparse attention like this, it's hard to
keep track of the global view of the
document because you have to look at the
entire document to understand the bigger
picture and how information relates at
that scale and that is also really
costly in attention as well. HA takes a
similar idea from CSA, but instead of
sparse attention and selecting the top K
like we saw earlier, it maintains a
plain attention which we know to be
expensive but compresses every single
token by a factor of 128. So by interle
HCA and CSA back and forth, the model
learns the intuition of how to keep
track of long-term dependencies and
short-term dependencies as it moves
through the network. And the result of
this technique is what led to the newer
V4 model reducing the KV cache
requirement down to 10% while requiring
27% of flop in compute. Now clearly all
of this required high talent engineering
to execute this. And you can already see
how much focus Chinese lab like DeepS
are pouring into token efficiency. And
as we step back, we're faced with the
bigger question on how the race between
US and China is shaping into, which
requires a dedicated video by itself. So
please stay tuned for an upcoming video
where I'll do a full analysis on AI race
between the US and China. And I know a
lot of you have showed huge interest for
the inference series to continue and I'm
working on that as well. So stay tuned
for that video which I'll be releasing
shortly.